add borg backup (#1727)
spantaleev/matrix-docker-ansible-deploy: docs/configuring-playbook-backup-borg.md

# Setting up borg backup (optional)

The playbook can install and configure [borgbackup](https://www.borgbackup.org/) with [borgmatic](https://torsion.org/borgmatic/) for you.
The backup will run based on `matrix_backup_borg_schedule` var (systemd timer calendar), default: 4am every day

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer: Should we say anything about what Borg providers one may use? Can any SSH-exposed server of your own serve as a Borg backup provider? What does it need for that (`borg` installed on the server? `rsync` installed on the server?)? We can let people discover this on the borgbackup site somewhere, but if there is some borgbackup documentation page about this, it'd be nice if we pointed to it directly from here.

Author: borg doesn't have vendor-lock, so any provider can be used. I'm not sure the configuring-**playbook**-backup-borg should have a copy of borg docs - it already has a link to the official site of the tool, where people can find docs and examples.

Some examples from borg docs (borgbackup.org -> click on docs): https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage/general.html#repository-urls

Reviewer 2: > Can any SSH-exposed server of your own serve as a Borg backup provider? What does it need for that (`borg` installed on the server?

yep, ssh and borg on the backup server should suffice. i think borg also comes packaged for some NAS distros etc which is nice

Author: moreover, you can backup to a local dir (usually some mounted volume), but this PR focuses on off-site backups

Reviewer 2: > any provider can be used. I'm not sure the configuring-playbook-backup-borg should have a copy of borg docs

I don't think we should put a list of providers, but I think it is reasonable to sum up in 1-2 sentences what it is about in the introduction/abstract paragraph for anyone not familiar, similar to 
> The playbook can install and configure [Honoroit](https://gitlab.com/etke.cc/honoroit) for you.
It's a bot you can use to setup your own helpdesk on matrix. 

or 

> Hookshot can bridge [Webhooks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Webhook) from software project management services such as GitHub, GitLab, JIRA, and Figma, as well as generic webhooks.

The essentials in my opinion are:
- "No vendor-lock" doesn't imply the same thing as "back up to your raspberry pi with a USB HDD at home" or "your NAS might already support receiving backups"
- short introduction with these key points: "borg is a deduplicating backup program with optional compression and encryption. That means your daily incremental backups can be stored in a fraction of the space and is safe weather you store it at home or a cloud service."

1. Create ssh key:

```bash

> ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -N '' -C matrix

Reviewer: Maybe it should be pointed out that you can run this command on any machine, not necessarily on the Matrix server.

Adding `-f matrix-borg-backup` may make sense. Otherwise, someone might override their existing `~/.ssh/id_ed25519{,.pub}` files.

```

2. Add public part of that ssh key to your borg provider / server:

```bash
# example to append the new PUBKEY contents, where:
# PUBKEY is path to the public key,
# USER is a ssh user on a provider / server
# HOST is a ssh host of a provider / server
cat PUBKEY | ssh USER@HOST 'dd of=.ssh/authorized_keys oflag=append conv=notrunc'
```

## Adjusting the playbook configuration

Minimal working configuration (`inventory/host_vars/matrix.DOMAIN/vars.yml`) to enable borg backup:

```yaml
matrix_backup_borg_enabled: true
matrix_backup_borg_repository: "USER@HOST:REPO"
matrix_backup_borg_passphrase: "PASSPHRASE"

> matrix_backup_borg_ssh_key: |

Reviewer: Should we put `_private` in the name somewhere, to make it more explicit that this is the private key?

Should we have a variable for the public key as well? If not for anything else, than at least for keeping a backup as part of `vars.yml`?

Author: Only private key is needed and I don't thing we need to add a public key var for backup purposes - you can restore public part from the private, IIRC

# Setting up borg backup (optional)

The playbook can install and configure [borgbackup](https://www.borgbackup.org/) with [borgmatic](https://torsion.org/borgmatic/) for you.
BorgBackup is a deduplicating backup program with optional compression and encryption.

> That means your daily incremental backups can be stored in a fraction of the space and is safe weather you store it at home or a cloud service.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I think I typo'd this in my original comment
```suggestion
That means your daily incremental backups can be stored in a fraction of the space and are safe whether you store it at home or on a cloud service.
```

The playbook can install and configure [borgbackup](https://www.borgbackup.org/) with [borgmatic](https://torsion.org/borgmatic/) for you.
BorgBackup is a deduplicating backup program with optional compression and encryption.

> That means your daily incremental backups can be stored in a fraction of the space and is safe wether you store it at home or on a cloud service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That means your daily incremental backups can be stored in a fraction of the space and is safe whether you store it at home or on a cloud service.
```
Nope, sorry, it's with an `h` in this case: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/whether
